How should we study politics? Traditionally, there was a tendency to focus on political
actors and institutions at the local and national levels. Beyond this, students and
scholars in the political sub-field of international relations (IR) tend to consider ‘the
international’ as the political space in which these local and national political interests
are represented in the form of interaction between states, regions of states, and a
worldwide ‘states-system’. But since the late twentieth century, the concept of
globalization has challenged these narrow, state-centric ways of thinking about politics.
This book is about global politics, which is to say it is about how politics – struggles
over power, how it should be distributed, and how we might best organise ourselves
and live together as societies – works at the global level.
But what is ‘the global’ when it comes to politics, and why does it matter? How does it
differ from ‘the international’, as a way of seeing or imagining our world? What kinds
of actors, institutions, and processes contribute the most to the globalisation of politics,
and which ones try to hold back its tide, and why? This chapter explores the rise of a
global imaginary in discussions of politics and international relations, considers its
implications for the study and practice of world politics – including issues ranging from
state sovereignty to the Covid-19 coronavirus pandemic – and reflects upon continuity
and change in global politics.
KEY ISSUES
• What is ‘the global’ and how does it relate to ‘the international’?
• How have the contours of world politics changed in recent decades?
• What have been the implications of globalization for world politics?
• How do mainstream approaches to global politics differ from critical approaches?
• Which aspects of world politics are changed by globalisation, and which remain the
same?

FROM ‘THE INTERNATIONAL’ TO ‘THE GLOBAL’?
The aim of this book is to provide an up-to-date, integrated and forward-looking
introduction to global politics . It seeks to be genuinely global while not ignoring the
international dimension of world affairs, accepting that ‘the global’ and ‘the
international’ complement one another and are not rival or incompatible modes of
understanding. In this view, global politics encompasses not just politics at the ‘global’
level – that is, worldwide processes, systems and institutional frameworks – but politics
at, and, crucially, across, all levels – the worldwide, the regional, the national and the
subnational (see Figure 1.1). Such an approach reflects the fact that while, over an
increasing range of issues, states interact with one another in conditions of global
interconnectedness and interdependence, they nevertheless remain the key actors on the
world stage.
However, if the international paradigm, in which world affairs boil down,
essentially, to relations between and among states, no longer constitutes an adequate
basis for understanding, what has changed, and how profound have these changes
been? How have the contours of world politics changed in recent years? The most
significant changes have been the following:
• The emergence of new global actors
• The growth of interdependence and interconnectedness
The erosion of the domestic/international divide
• The rise of global governance.
State: A political institution that successfully claims sovereign jurisdiction within
defined territorial borders.
Focus on . . . Defining global politics?
What does it mean to suggest that politics has ‘gone global’? How does ‘global’ politics
differ from ‘international’ politics? The term ‘international’ means between nations,
and is today commonly understood to mean between nation-states or simply ‘states’.
The term ‘global’, on the other hand, has two meanings. In the first, global means
worldwide, having planetary (not merely regional or national) significance. The globe
is, in effect, the world. Global politics, in this sense, refers to politics that is conducted
at a global rather than a local, national or regional level. It therefore focuses primarily
on the work of organizations such as the United Nations (UN) and the World Trade
Organization (WTO), which have a near universal membership, and on issues (such as
the environment and the economy) where interconnectedness has gone so far that
events and developments affect, actually or potentially, all parts of the world and so all
people on the planet.
In the second meaning (the one used in this book), global means comprehensive; it
refers to all elements within a system, not just to the system as a whole. While such an
approach acknowledges that a significant (and, perhaps, growing) range of political
interactions now takes place at the global level, it rejects the idea that the global level
has, in any sense, transcended politics at the national, local or, for that matter, any other
level. In particular, the advent of global politics does not imply that international
politics should be consigned to the dustbin of history. This is important because the
notion that politics has been caught up in a swirl of interconnectedness that effectively
absorbs all of its parts, or ‘units’, into an indivisible, global whole, is difficult to sustain. 